---
title: How We Help
description: This post describes the Neat Systems approach to solving many common growth-related startup communication and information storage problems by treating their shared root cause.
date: 2025-03-03
tags: frameworks, scaling, root cause analysis
---
The business problems and subject areas on which Neat Systems focuses are often separated from each other, or thought of as disparate disciplines. Neat Systems believes that a holistic approach to the underlying business systems at the center of these symptoms is necessary to truly build a sustainable organization ready to thrive in times of rapid growth. In this post, I'll outline some of the common growth-related startup communication and information storage problems that arise around certain growth inflection points that roughly correspond to common venture capital (VC) funding rounds. For each scale increment, we'll talk a little about the shared root cause of several types of organizational systems breakdown common at that phase. Some of the symptoms you see will also manifest differently for fully-remote or remote-first organizations than for organizations with some office presence on a weekly basis or more. Things are where they shouldn't be and things aren't where they should be. But it's kind of streamlining the organizational chaos. If you've already started a company before, you might recognize when the problem that they hit last time is starting to happen again, and that's where they'll really notice and feel the full pain of that problem before it comes to full fruition.

Neat Systems helps your organization manage information: figure out if information is where it needs to be, and if it is not there and should be, how do we get it there? If it is there and it shouldn't be, how do we get it out of there? And so some of this is setting up communication structures within organizations. Some of this can be more hands on, like security compliance types of controls, or tech docs, types of controls in terms of the other problem that organizations will often face, but a lot of it is around systems and process thinking and making sure that the patterns the organization is Actually exhibiting are aligned to values. one of the things that I'm seeing in the market right now is that this is a thing people have traditionally thought of as a full time employee thing that in the current funding environment, and especially the SPAR into the current funding environment, they don't have the financial capacity for and so people are trying to kind of push it out into the future, to the point where they have funding for a full Time employee to work on this, but it's not really a thing you can push into the future with no penalty. It gets worse and harder, and it hampers your organization's effectiveness in the meanwhile. And so I think being able to scale it down from this is a full time employee commitment to here is a limited time offering is going to be a really important part of this. But more specifically, what amount of time people are typically looking for? Is this full time for a set period of time and then moving on to an intensive at another organization, or is this like a gradual taper, sort of a thing? 

I've chosen VC rounds as stand-ins for scale here because investors share certain objectives as outcomes for each stage of growth, and those objectives are often intertwined with the types of organizational changes that require shifts in information storage and communication patterns. Because I recognize that not everyone is familiar with VC rounds, I've also tried to include a common employee count for each phase. The employee counts are variable, because the business goals are really more-closely-related to the growth pattern than headcounts are.

The first growth inflection point is around 10-15 employees, often corresponding to a recent seed funding VC round. At this stage, especially for B2B SaaS, your CTO and other leaders who aren't in charge of sales will often begin to take into account the compliance and legal requirements for selling into larger organizations, and you're probably starting to look into SOC2 or similar to ease the burden of vendor security questionnaires from your prospects and clients. Depending on how heavily-regulated your product's industry is, this can sometimes shift significantly sooner or later in the organization's development, but this tends to be the first time that your organization has encountered a need to have documentation around certain subjects, and often will result in your organization developing documentation does not align to actual processes or policies as implemented in people's daily work. When your organization develops documentation that does not reflect the organization's actual culture, you create cultural drift over time because new hires can't tell the difference between documentation that has been created for intended actual reference, and documentation was created only to fulfill a compliance obligation, and not intended to be followed. Also, as your organization reaches this stage of growth, executives tend to be less hands-on, and are less than fault in the daily workings of employees lives. This can cause an easier shift towards undesired working practices by employees of the organization that was possible at the time, when the CEO was in every meeting and able to easily keep track of everyone's work processes. These all lead to growing pains that employees will often perceive a scattered problems, but that really point at a shift in the organization away from a unified way of viewing the world and handling tasks and towards a desperate collection of task processes. This is an important sign that you're starting to grow, however, dealing with the sooner Colucci, better optimize productivity, and achieve a healthy, working relationship with less of the frustration that comes from learning that a teammate has not been using the process you intended.

around 10 to 15 people is where the CEO is not able to be directly involved in all of the projects the organization is taking on anymore. And so that's often where people first start to notice that they have a knowledge management issue, because you can no longer just read every Slack channel and know what's going on. You can no longer just be in all of the meetings and know what's going on. So that's where you have to start having some form of communication, and then as you get to that next scale, honestly, I've seen it  

The next inflection point is around the time of a series A round. This is often around 40-50 employees, but I've seen it happen as small as 35 and some orgazniations make it pretty close to 80 employees before hitting this phase's challenges. At this size, one set of knowledge management is no longer sufficient. You have to break things down into chunks, because even if the information is well organized, it's still too much information, even with a summary, and you can't keep track of all of those things as an individual. 

The third inflection point is around your Series B round, typically 80-100 employees. Around 80 to 100 is where you start to have those really specialized teams forming. And so you have people who are working on something where other people don't need to care about a summary of what's going on so much as the outcome of what's going on. And so that's shift from making the information digestible to making the information feel actionable. 

The final inflection point we'll discuss here is around a Series C round, typically 250-300 people but up to 500 in some cases. And then as you get into that like 250, 300 ish range, that's when you're having a little bit more diversity in terms of skill set and also further specialization. And so you often need people to take action who have no grounding in the specialty that they are taking action on the basis of, for example, you might have something really specific that the security team needs from sales or vice versa, and that's where you need to start getting better cross functional communication, really. This scale is out of scope for Neat Systems, because at this size organizations really stand to benefit from having one or more full-time operations and/or information security specialists looking specifically at how the organization stores and processes information.

## In remote environments VS office environments
- remote requires informal communications to be systematized, or you'll see early problems
- office environments hit a harder inflection point when you no longer see everyone in the office regularly without trying
- Both cases come with some risk of backchanneling, but those backchannels look different depending on the org structure

## Recognizing Success
- Minimal to no reactive compliance emergencies (allegations of violations)
- The only time organizations have proactive compliance emergencies is when there's a sales contract on the line. Look at your sales contracts: mean time to close, differences in your sales funnel based on organization size at the phase of the sales cycle where your industry handles compliance and information management considerations, and number of cycles on compliance and information management questions should all decrease if this is implemented successfully

Within the organization, employees should feel like
- they have the information needed to do their job
- they rarely if ever need to leave the system they're working in to acquire that information
- they feel confident updating processes, whether directly or with their team, and know when and how to do so
- they know where and how to store information safely, and without much effort

## Acknowledgements
Special thanks to Wes Wheless of [Develop My IP](https://www.developmyip.com/), with whom I discussed this concept before forming the organization and whose guidance was extremely helpful in identifying why I think of seemingly-disparate problems as symptoms of a shared root cause.